### National Security Strategy Committee: Session with former chief executive of National Cyber Security Centre

[link](https://www.parliamentlive.tv/Event/Index/260ea915-50f7-4b83-8206-7e068d5e911e)

**Year**: 2021

**Witness**: Ciaran Martin (Oxf, KCL)

**Details**:

- Rt Hon Margaret Beckett MP (Labour, Derby South)

  - NCSC achievements and future direction? Good pivot to more activist strategy. Detect and communicate clearly. Easier to use tech more safely. Future: scale to true national level defence systems. Get off legacy, antequated systems (this is where Biden's money is going). Skills. UK model is a good story so far.
  - What would you want in new/revised strategy? Good prioritisation of cyber. No radical overhall needed. Scaling. Impact in private sector. Skills. Critical infrastructure protection. Be prepared to make hard choices toward more secure technology. e.g. Encryption is a hard public policy choice - people want it, but law enforcement counter. e.g. Frigility of global tech supply chains and their trustworthiness.
  - NSC engagement? No cause for complaint. Access to ministers and collective decisions sound. Lack of single ownership of cyber is the negative way of saying it was a collective discussion. Clear and unchanged strategy. Decent and stable funding. Decent balance of ministerial support at the right removes (i.e. suitable engagement of ministerial engagement with operational flexibility).
- The Lord Harris of Haringey (Labour, Life Peer)
  - Metrics to demonstrate NCSC success?  It's paradox of cybersecurity: for such a data driven, technical subject, there are few metrics. ITU (UK top). Harvard Belfare Centre (UK fare comparatively badly). Tend to be quality of strategy or money, not outcome related. We went from input to at least some output e.g. volume of takedowns. Share of UK maliciously hosted websites etc. Can measure progress compared with other country here. But what does an outcome mean? UK automatic takedown service reduced time-to-die from about a day, to 45 minutes. But quite a lot harm happens in the first hour, so not as dramatic a reduction in harm as you might think. It may be worth doing this internationally with partner governments. Proper, objective, research and metrics would be valuable, although it's hard. 
  - NCSC and software standards? On newer technologies e.g. IoT devices, we have some fresh thinking.  History: 2000s - economic model was personal data for free access to web based services. IoT has a hardware dimension. Often paid for (consumers buy a product and a buy an ongoing service). Particularly the physical aspect means trading standards can be imposed. DCMS led, and NCSC supported, a code of practice for sales. UK & Singapore signed an R&D agreement in Oct 2019 - Singapore has put this into law. UK plans to, and I would recommend this. Whatever new technology we talk about in the future - 5G, AI, quantum - build security in. 
  - How does NCSC assure its advice (challenge function)? Use 'white papers' (has a technical meaning, not a policy one) - you publish your thinking on emerging technologies and expert communities challenge it. There are ferocious arguments in highly technical communities, incomprehensible to most people. Essentially it is transparency. e.g. incident management model, established a 24/7 internal technical review planel. 
- The Baroness Healy of Primrose Hill (Labour, Life Peer) - 16.24.21
  - Cyber challenges from COVID?  Technology challenge: huge increase in demand.  It's unfashionable to praise British communication service providers, but I thought it fair when BT and Vodaphone engineers appeared in Birthday Honours list. Cyber challenge 1. Consumer/user. UK model largely correct to treat cyber as an ordinary business risk (i.e. don't make a massive unplanned change overnight). Organisations did that reasonably responsibly. Government did decent job providing management and help with that transition. A series of security distasters would have appeared in your briefing papers for this. Cyber challenge 2. Also consumer/user facing. We often underestimate the scale, venality, and moral terpitude of cyber crime. how peutrid it all is (eloquent), international cyber crime is pretty disguisting. UK responded well to respond to this e.g. national takedown of scams. Lucky rather than immune regarding scurge of healthcare with ransomware e.g. Dusseldorf ransomware on health showed how this could have been. [likely link](https://www.wired.co.uk/article/ransomware-hospital-death-germany) Cyber challenge 3. Changing national level risk. The old debate: should you draw up a schedule of risks. I/others argued against that -  bureaucracies arent good at lists because it will change. COVID is vindication of that. 5 years ago - critical protections meant energy, banks. Post-2016, this was democracy. Post-2020, food distribution, then vaccine research. The lesson is that the UK was flexible and adaptable - what you care about most is going to change (and in 2020 it did change rapidly).
  - Planning via exercises? Every time we did a major exercise, the next major crisis bore no resemblence to it e.g. On 1 Dec 2016, Phil Hammond made a statement, talking about attacks on power plants (following Russian actions in Kiev). First major crisis following that strategy was in 2017: a North Korean rogue ransomware attack gone wrong. Bore no resemblance to what we were thinking about. Hard to anticipate. UK Cyber does a good thing to be flexible regarding who takes lead (e.g. if its state-backed, its intelligence/COBRA led; if its criminal, law enforcement).
- The Rt Hon the Baroness Neville-Jones (Conservative, Life Peer)
  - Preventative action only (dropped)? Telecomms is following financial services model, don't box cyber away, but test it actively. Financial service stress test. If Bill passes, Ofcom will do same for telecomms to ensure thriving industry. NCSC can provide technical advice, but is not a regulator. More generally, it is hard to extend a big business model of regulation everywhere. NCSC can provide guidance and guidelines and best practice for charities - don't have the same money, but can strengthen the basics.
  - Has COVID shifted cyber awareness? Hasn't strategically shifted the balance on cybersecurity.  We are on the cusp of shifting to newer technologies. Maybe more of an imperative.
  - Quantum timescale? Hesitate - the science is there, it is all about the engineering and marketability right. Venture Capital industry are looking at a decade for widespread use (everyday commerce) at the earliest. I claim no specific expertise in this space.
- The Baroness Lane-Fox of Soho (Crossbench, Life Peer)
  - Relationship with private sector? In terms of scale, NCSC is about 1000 people. Mostly operational, specific technical expertise. How does government reach a view? Advisory expert function on business is never going to be huge, although hugeness may be undesirable compared with a purveyor of good practice and advice so people can take judgements for themselves. It is not easy to have in-house expertise in government to say this is what you should do technologically, the UK has done this reasonably well. Cybersecurity is not an unassailable priority, it is to be balanced with other risks. There is a closeness (rapidity, not cosy) between government and telecomms sector - one of the reasons for the Bill is telecomms said publically and constructively we are reaching the limits of what we can do voluntarily, you need to put this into the regulatory framework. I would be cautious of a national IT helpdesk function.
  - Measuring outcomes in private sector? So much of government success is about quite boring things e.g. capacity. DCMS breaches survey - meets the standards of official national statistics so is methodologically sound. But challenge is: how much of that is growing awareness of being breached vs. more breaches compared to last year. That's not a fault of the survey. Laudable. Should be a pursued public policy objective.
  - Should COVID change definition of critical national infrastructure? We should be able to quickly flip the definition. 
- The Rt Hon the Lord King of Bridgwater (Conservative, Life Peer) - 16.47.03
  - Do some organisations decline to be involved with you? The NCSC is not a regulator but a supporting function. Most organisations welcome that. Following GDPR, there was an observable change - sometimes quite informal relationships became more formal e.g. presence of General Counsel. Outright refusal is pretty rare in UK.
  - In the staff of 1000, how many countries are represented? As part of GCHQ, assume all UK nationals. Formal interchange hasn't been declared publicly, occurs in varying degrees.
- The Lord Powell of Bayswater (Crossbench, Life Peer)
  - Take up of cyber security info sharing partnership? Should be more take-up. Some busy businesses don't see what is in this for them.
  - Is increasing number of incidents an inevitable trend? Definition of incidents - this really tells you nothing more than the capacity of the organisation. 1 big incident might wipe out the capacity to deal with 100 small ones. Major state-sponsored espionage is something we will be living with.  We should not be living with the crazy rise in ransonmware - that is a fixable problem requiring international attention. The crims are well organised but not technically sophisticated. Classic ransomware (locked out) is taken care of by good, deployable backups. A new ransomware variant threatens to leak data - admittedly backups don't take care of this.  Would love to see a recognised,  international measure of ransomware. Frankly, some disruption is achievable here.
  - Would increase in resourrces help, or morer like a cycle of weaponry? Might not need more resources for ransomware, might just need smarter public policy. 
  - One problem is economic framework on insurance and ransomware. Crazy.  In UK, it is increasingly routine practice for insurers to pay out to cover the cost of paying criminals Bitcoin. Exception: recognised terrorist organisation, because the Law on extortion dates from a period of international terrorist kidnappings. Most people pay. But you can't claim your GDPR fine. Same in US (exception there is US Treasury sanctions list and guess whether their criminal of choice is on the list). What is the public policy benefit, where both these are true?
- The Lord Brennon (Non-affiliated, Life Peer)
  - Cyber and NHS? Privacy and confidentiality of health records is taken seriously across the world. Good example of matching practicality and security. The UK was fortunate that NHS Digital was accelerated after 2017. There is quite careful attention paid to where data is in aggregate, this is a good, careful model.
- Mr Tom Tugendhat MP (Conservative, Tonbridge and Malling) - 17.02.18
  - Huawei? Policy choices for a democracy to take are becoming clearer now and easier to explain. 3 pending votes in parliament: slave labour (TT's amendment). telecomms security bill. national security and investment bill. The slave labour vote shows the ethical problem of business in China, even though the products are not a strategic national security risk. The Hauwei advice - been in UK with risk mitigation model for >15 years - not ethical, but would it constitute a national security risk (technical judgement). Telecomms vote - structural problems in telecomms security that needs to be fixed regardless of provider. (SolarWinds vindicates that approach - not just country of origin). National security dependence - 35% judgement, originally, was about this intrinsic vulnerability. Then it changed. The vote on China policy might have won the day - it was never fully tested because US sanctions blew apart the mitigation policy. There was no possibility to assure their products technically.
  - How do NCSC separate the technical and the political? Our technical assessment is an input to a democratic judgement by Parliamentarians, and that is absolutely right. Elected politicians, if they carry the House, can take that decision. Ourr job was to tell NSC how it works now, and what the security tradeoff? 2 providers (without Hauwei) is shaky in resiliance terms. NCSC put technical detail out for scrutiny - it's better now that we are having a debate about the ethics and efficacy about China policy, rather than doing this by proxy (about compomisability of a base station). That's a better discussion to have based on the balance of expertise. 
- The Rt Hon the Lord Campbell of Pittenweem (Liberal Democrat, Life Peer)
  - Tension of technical with other considerations? Not sure it matters. 1. the technical facts did change - US sanctions made risk mitigation model impossible on an ongoing basis. 2. as a democrat, I am relaxed about elected Parliamentarians/Ministers taking judgements on the balance of risks. Telecomms is not just about security, if it was, you wouldn't build anything. 3. Personal aspect - if there are bigger issues - of foreign policy, of ethics - then put them on the table. If the NCSC had been overruled on the basis that they had got dozens of pages of highly technical, professional analysis wrong, that would be a hugely damaging rejection of technical expertise. That never happened, but this is hugely important.
  - Is NCSC stronger as a result of these events? Yes. Because relevance to public policy decisions is everything. My main contention is that we haven't put security inputs into the framing of our digital policy, well that's no longer true. Great. Ministers took techincal recommendations incredibly seriously. When NCSC could no longer assure the model, government didn't press ahead with something its security experts said wouldn't work anymore. NCSC is a highly relevant body (it should never have sole authority to direct public policy in a democracy)
- Richard Graham MP (Conservative, Gloucester)
  - Will Telecomms Bill resolve issues of 5G (or not really, if we are just substituting a Huawei box with Ericsson or Nokia boxes that say made in China)? In technical terms, the position of Huawei in 5G was a secondary issue. The primary issue was the security of the framework as a whole. So: for Nokia and Ericsson - its what standards are they adhering to? Protocols for third party access?  So yes. We need to look at standards of providers. A complicated business with a history of poor security. All pieces of legislation has imperfections. But this is the correct framework.
  - With two superpowers - China, TikTok data is coming next - how easy will it be to represent the agencies so that Parlimentarians arre sure what the technical assessment really is? NCSC hasn't put out any erroreous or inflated views of this particular social media app. Conspicious by absence. Not evidence of politically motivated assessments. TikTok is not a terribly strategic service in my judgement. Cyber security is being broadened to a strategic level - supply chains? sovereignty? trade? Democracies are historically bad at doing economics and security at the same time, in the right balance.
  - Should the strategic be with the NSC rather than the NCSC, once it is above the purely security issue? Yes, I think that is the way it is going. The UK is not a global market by itself. We often hear lets build a FVEY alternative to Huawei. The FVEY does intelligence sharing alliance, it doesn't build telecomms companies. There is no economic and commercial and industrial subcommittee of the FVEYs. The US and the UK are not common markets. Building that reality is a hard problem, and its economic ministries, trade ministries that do that.
- Darren Jones MP (Labour, Bristol North West) - 17.26.11
  - Is there a strategy for legacy IT system replacement? I suspect no. Many multi-year decisions were delayed in 2020.
  - NCSC do defensive cyber. New offensive cyber capability is National Cyber Force. Correct strategy? Part of the problem is they both have the word cyber in it. The declared, public mandate of the National Cyber Force (Mr Fleming and General Patrick Sanders at Chatham House in December) includes countering international terrorism, transnational peadophile rings, and support war fighting. Laudable. But its not cyber security, it is the pursuit of national security goals through cyber means. The first and possibly the only offensive cyber, declared by Sir Michael Fallon in Oct 2016, was against Islamic State's propaganda machine ahead of Mosul offensive. This would have achieved three objectives: reduced risk of international terrorism by degrading Isil's ability to organise, reduced domestic terrorism because those potentially radicalised will not have seen material, and aided military allies. But Isil has nothing to do with UK cyber security - Isil didn't have offensive cyber capabilities. Offensive cyber isn't to promote cyber security. Steer away from the boxing ring mentality. We should get better at information security - we hold these tools, but there is a history of them leaking. And safer technology. Offensive cyber relies on exploiting technological weaknesses - encryption is the classic here. It secures business information, but also the communications of dissident regimes. 
  - Are we credible global leaders on use of cyber? We are in a decent position about the responsible use of offensive cyber. There has been little progress in agreeing conduct globally. Nobody is leading. UK is a bit reluctant to lead (China probably won't agree/follow our rules). There is scope to be a bit more forward leading.
- The Rt Hon the Baroness Neville-Jones (Conservative, Life Peer)
  - Where should closer integration of domestic and military cyber lead? GCHQ's original purpose was supporting military operations. But it's uncontentious to say future wars will have a technological dimension and it is right that there should be embedded arrangements. Intelligence led case for intervention in online child exploitation.  To do that through a part-military organisation is a little curious, historically we have differentiated between military intelligence and law enforcement functions, for very good reason. Article 5 definitions of cyber attacks or the Tallinn manual leaves an opportunity to bring that thinking forward. Government has been remarkably reticent about putting discussions out there, for reasons I don't quite understand. These debates should be had in public and there is expertise like on this call. 
  - Doctrine? You can say things about the operational and legal environment without saying anything about how they work, or would compromise the effectiveness of their ultimate use.  Three things that could use further illumination: clarity of mandate - the relationship with law enforcement; risk management - from the outside, Western organisations operate on the presumption of 100% security 100% of the time, and history says we shouldn't do that; where are we going with this. I would like to see an umambigious commitment to safer technology for everybody. And what are we trying to achieve at a global level in this human created domain. 
- The Baroness Henig (Labour, Life Peer)
  - Is lack of cyber skills strategy a harm to NCSC or public? NCSC need elite skills, so not really relevant for recruitment or retention. More generally, I didn't want it's mandate to be too broad because that is undoable - didn't take charge of a skills strategy for 66 million people in the 5th biggest economy in the world. It's easy to complain about skills shortages, but be forensic. There are three levels of skills: elite skills, small number of organisers; good enough for big government departments, companies; basic literacy for whole population. NCSC started skills competitions for PhDs, ended up going right back into secondary and that's a good thing. Talking dozens - thousands of people. Accreditation framework of skills works well - not perfect, but getting there for big departments. We have a choice about long term education - for kids entering primary now, how much are we going to reposition the whole education system around STEM and digital. They aren't going to be in the labour market for 20 years. Delivery at that scale is the Dept for Education's responsibility, not tacked on to NCSC. 
  - How do we rate globally in terms of skills? Unsure. Elite skills at government level, we are okay. General digital skills, don't know. Graduates in STEM, well behind big Asian giants. 
- The Rt Hon the Lord King of Bridgwater (Conservative, Life Peer) - 17.47.50
  - Brexit leaves cyber assurances on a voluntary basis - problematic? Honestly, no. My expertise is in intelligence-led organisations (there are challenges for law enforcement but they are separate), most of those functions were under the auspices of national security and therefore exempt from treaties of EU. UK-France relations for example are improving, even post Brexit vote. Most cyber alliances are bilaterial or voluntary multilateral, ad-hoc based on competence (as in quality, not legal competence). Voluntary arrangements aren't the same as binding arrangements. UK well regarded and expertise likely to still be sought. Principal body is a standards body called NISA - I never sat waiting for the next NISA diktat. The two areas to look out for are data adequacy (well known) and may have to act differently in 5G-type diversification debate, which is about markets and trade. Outside the EU that is different. 
  - NATO more important post-Brexit? UK is well regarded. NATO is fundamentally different to EU e.g. no body of law. UK leadership - thought leadership and delivery leadership - is recognised here.
